---
layout: post
title: JPEGS into PDF
---

Some time ago I stumbled across [Manifold](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manifold_(magazine)) an old magazine published in the 1960s out of Warwick university.  It's a whimsical Mathematical magazine, now reproduced on [Ian Stewart's Website](https://ianstewartjoat.weebly.com/manifold-magazine.html).  A python script later and I downloaded the image files (now repeating the exercise after I realised higher-quality scans are available from a slightly different URL base).

This left me with a large number of jpeg files, which is both annoying, and a pain to try to read.  Fast-forward in time to the start of 2018.  I was interested in PDF files, and got sufficiently interested to research the file format, and write a fairly serious Python module to convert PDF files into Python objects which could be browsed.  I also wrote some code to produce PDF files assembled out of images: using both PNG compression, and JBIG2.  For the latter I used an external converter, but for the PNG files I went so far as to implement my own (slow, but not impossibly so) implementation in Python.

<!--more-->

Oddly, I left out the possibility to use JPEGs.  This was odd, as PDF files have an extremely minimal implementation: just store, without any processing, a valid JPEG file (with headers and all).  So, a solution presents itself: convert the Manifold JPEG files into a PDF.  This is a reversible procedure, as it's really just bundling together the files with a small amount of extra information to form a valid PDF file.

I pull up the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/MatthewDaws/PDFImage) and look at the code.  Initially reaction is "Wow, this is complicated." followed by "I wrote this?" followed 5 minutes later by "Ah, that's quite a nice (if I say so myself) use of an abstract base class (a use of the "[Template Pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template_method_pattern)".)  5 lines of code, and I can compress images using JPEG.  I have also forgotten a lot of what I knew about software engineering (I doubt now I could structure a module as well).

It's been about 18 months since I seriously wrote code.  Do I miss it?  Yes, to an extent.  However, life is very busy, and being a Mathematician, or being a decent software engineer, are not hobbies, and I simply don't have the time to do both at the level I'd like to.  At the moment, Maths is winning.
