---
layout: post
title: Neighbourhood bases, continued.
latex
---

We [saw before](2019-01-31-topology.html) that on a set $X$ we can specify a (unique) topology
by, for each $x\in X$, specifying a collection of sets $U_x$ which will satisfy that:
  
  - Each $V\in U_x$ contains $x$ and will be open;
  - Every open $C \ni x$ will be such that there is $V\in U_x$ with $V\subseteq C$,

if and only if we have the conditions that:

  - Given $A_1,\cdots,A_n\in U_x$, there is $A\in U_x$ with $A\subseteq A_1\cap\cdots\cap A_n$;
  - Given $B\in U_y$ with $x\in B$, there is $A\in U_x$ with $A\subseteq B$.

However, we might ask: what is the advantage of specifying the "basic open sets" about each
point, rather than just specifying a [base](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base_(topology)) for
the topology?

<!--more-->

One advantage comes when you consider subspaces.  Let $Y\subseteq X$ be a subset.  There are
then two natural ways to construct a topology on Y:

- Use the [subspace topology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subspace_topology); that is,
the open subsets of $Y$ are exactly the sets $U\cap Y$ for $U$ open in $X$;
- For each $y\in Y$ let $V_y = \{ A\cap Y :  A\in U_y\}$ and generate a topology using
$V_y$ as the basic open neighbourhoods of $y$.

Do these give the same topology?  We will see that the answer is yes.  Firstly,
it is clear that every member of $V_y$ is open in the subspace topology.
Conversely, given $V = U\cap Y$ open in the subspace topology, for $y\in V$, there is $A\in U_y$
with $A\subseteq U$, so $B=A\cap Y$ is such that $B\in V_y$ with $B\subseteq V$.
Thus $V$ is in the topology generated by the $V_y$.

In many situations, the sets $V_y$ will occur very naturally.  For example, the topology
induced by a metric has as basic open sets about $x$ the open balls centred at $x$.
The above reasoning now immediately shows that the subspace topology on $Y\subseteq X$
will agree with the topology given by restricting to metric to $Y$ and then considering
$Y$ as its own metric space.

This post was originally motivated by [Fell's topology](http://www.math.harvard.edu/~ctm/home/text/books/bekka_harpe_valette/KazhdanTotal.pdf#page=433)
on a set of (equivalence classes) of unitary representations of a locally compact group $G$.
A basic open set about a representation $\pi$ is $W=W(\pi,\varphi_i,Q,\epsilon)$ where $\epsilon>0$,
$Q\subseteq G$ is compact, and $(\varphi_i)_{i=1}^n$ are functions of positive type associated to
$\pi$, and $\rho\in W$ exactly when we can approximate each $\varphi_i$, up to $\epsilon$ error on $Q$,
by sums of functions of positive type associated to $\rho$.

Clearly the first (intersection related) condition holds for this family.  The second condition
seems trickier: if $\rho\in W$, then we wish to find $ W' = W(\rho,\varphi_j',Q',\epsilon') $ such that
if $\rho'\in W'$ then $\rho'\in W$.  Really this is a triangle inequality argument.
\[ |\varphi_i(g) - \sum_k \phi_{i,k}(g)|<\epsilon \qquad (g\in Q) \]
where each $\phi_{i,k}$ is associated to $\rho$.  (This follows as $\rho\in W$).
As $Q$ is compact, we can decrease $\epsilon$ slightly and still have a true inequality:
this allows us some wiggle room.
Now if each $\phi_{i,k}$ is very well approximated on $Q$ by sums of functions of positive type associated
to $\rho'$, then the $\varphi_i$ can also be $\epsilon$ approximated by such functions.  Thus
$\rho'\in W'(\rho,\phi_{i,k},Q,\epsilon')$ does imply $\rho'\in W$, for some small $\epsilon'>0$.

So this topology interacts nicely with subspaces.  In particular, the definition works well
for subsets of the (proper class) collection of all representations.